Ziad: The world's going different from a different.
Ziad: perspective than you did before the program so so that that was something that I thought was eye opening was was extremely beneficial.
Ziad: And I think you know as long as you maintain that perspective, even after the Program.
Ziad: keep learning to proven your skill sets I think that's that's really one of the key things so it's sort of opens the doors to do those things and gives you the language and the perspective to pick up a little bit more knowledge along the way.
Shaun: You want to talk a little bit about what the company is doing to give people similar idea of backgrounds.
Ziad: We sure yeah I mean we Sean said yeah I kind of left a well paying job just to kind of go and start a company in incidentally at the time, I thought it was going to do with with a couple of people that were in my class in 2016.
Ziad: But that didn't happen, I was on my own and and running it on my own and.
Ziad: And you know met Sean and the program was it was good, I was actually doing a Python think I filled in on Python lecture for Dr jesperson and Sean I met.
Ziad: And you know, since then we've kind of went on to you know help a lot of clients here in the Houston area, and you know and it's not just doing data science work it's reading in the digital world so we're doing a lot of work and.
Ziad: You know kind of help companies with transforming what their processes into through digital processes, a lot of times you can even talk about data science and machine learning before you actually.
Ziad: help you know if their data is not accessible that's not even starting point to do anything there so we're doing a lot of that work we are focused on to be on industrial applications so manufacturing whether it's pharmaceutical.
Ziad: chemicals and refining all in gas and power, this is sort of where we like to spend our time we're mostly a services company that's what we do and.
Ziad: We part of that we develop our own set of products and a lot of our you know kind of TEAM members and employees are people with PhDs and master's and have a strong knowledge and data science space.
Shaun: Were you scared it's all there.
Ziad: yeah i've had some sleepless nights for sure you know, when you have a family and you kind of.
Ziad: quit your job to do this to chase your dream that's you know, this is not easy, and then I remember somebody gave me the advice of that I need to downsize and live in an apartment and.
Ziad: I thought that person that's That was a new Sean said that I thought that person was out of their mind, but now I see why they said that so it does it doesn't require sacrifices if I.
Shaun: would have said it yeah.
Shaun: yeah you have to pay for disappointment and and lots of little battles, because not everybody likes what you're doing.
Shaun: You know I really kind of focus on character strength of principle and integrity and and the rest of it, the technical skills following behind because there's no doubt when you're working for someone or when you're going for an interview sincerity shines through.
Shaun: It really makes a big difference.
Matt McGuinness: So, was that everybody that's in the kind of change jobs or For those of you that.
Matt McGuinness: You know, maybe stayed in position or didn't start a company always that's a huge adventure to found a new company, but kind of in the employment space like.
Matt McGuinness: If you didn't change positions, how did you kind of find ways to use the skills and atrophy it's one of the things i'm worried about like i've you know gone through and done all these fancy algorithms and there's not necessarily a business case.
Matt McGuinness: to dive into everything So what did you do to kind of stay with it, so to speak.
paloma urbano: So I could give you a little bit of my journey after I was.
paloma urbano: In the analytic Center of excellence, as I was working through the masters, but when I finished the masters, I thought okay it's an opportunity to do something else.
paloma urbano: And so I took a chance, I look around the company and sometimes there are no positions open.
paloma urbano: That you fit in so it's a lot of conversations you don't one of the advisors someone gave me is don't go and look outside.
paloma urbano: Just look at your role and your group and your company and see where you kind of start opening opportunities, how you can convince.
paloma urbano: Some of the groups that they may not be doing analytics initially to take that first.
paloma urbano: And that's how the role that I am in right now, it happened, I started I realized nobody in our company was doing anything in HR analytics.
paloma urbano: Which is amazing, with the amount of data that we have in this area, so I had conversations with some of the managers and they decided to open this team.
paloma urbano: Where I transferred to so good advice that look into your company first don't move out before you decide to take a different and draw.
paloma urbano: Most of the people that I think in our masters they end up either moving roles or opening opportunities within the companies or moving companies there's a lot of transferring like that.
paloma urbano: Luckily, my company, they have a lot of opportunities to continue learning so it was really good just sometimes is some of the visual sometimes just a machine learning.
paloma urbano: Fortunately, getting into the newest phase of personnel data on payroll and all of that.
paloma urbano: What I realized is that there's a lot of opportunities to do some of the predictive analytics with a totally different data day and think about.
paloma urbano: But constantly learning every time was set up project is loud Okay, what is this about i've never done this before so exciting and I always looking for what is the new ongoing thing.
Shaun: So so follow up the takeaway from that is that you, you made your own space, you came up with an idea.
Shaun: and looked internal in sold the idea, and you got them.
Shaun: got them to form a unit that I guess you're working in on leading and you use your own initiative to get it off the ground is that right.
paloma urbano: Yes.
Shaun: Thank goodness it's still there as well.
Shaun: See you yeah so that's a good lesson, but make your own future.
daniel cota: yeah now just to add to that one of the options that I or opportunities that I had was I was a senior manager for a small company data warehouse and bi and similar to what paloma.
daniel cota: had recommended there was I reached out to several of our business partners, as I was going through this program and I found.
daniel cota: A very good customer retention use case for my my capstone project, and so, even though I was a senior manager for data warehouse and bi you know, I was able to you know.
daniel cota: I had access to all the data which was very helpful, but I actually you know, took that initiative and went to business partners and.
daniel cota: thought of those use cases and so forth, and you know just by doing that really helped me, you know, try to you know hone in those skills that I was learning throughout the program so that was really helpful for me.
daniel cota: and keep in mind all of these projects that you're doing if you look at my linkedin page, I actually have them listed as projects under Texas a&m because they're very valuable projects.
daniel cota: And you know you talk about just those simple regressions that you did, and so forth, you know those those kind of help showcase some of the different.
daniel cota: You know algorithms you've worked with and the different use cases and so forth.
daniel cota: And those can be really good as far as conversations with potential employers and so forth, so really leverage what you've done throughout the program and and put it out there and linkedin so they could see some of the projects you've worked on.
Shaun: So, maintaining focus here, I know people tend to lose the drift point of the conversation as time goes by, but the question was how do you prevent the skills from atrophying.
Shaun: and
Shaun: If you don't have a vehicle to move forward on that that is in be quite.
Shaun: quite difficult to do but.
Shaun: But, but just kind of help.
Shaun: us in a very small way, say over the Christmas, I was afraid that I would get I would get some of the things that i've learned so I set myself a task of building.
Shaun: A neural net for image recognition and spent time when I wasn't.
Shaun: Drinking red wine, I spent.
Shaun: Programming find that and that's that's really the only way to do it is to keep at it like I said, it has to become.
Shaun: A part of what you really want to do.
Shaun: You, you have to be so interested in it that you're going to sit down and think man, if you could idea would be this and be good idea of somebody can do that, and then think to yourself what.
Shaun: Can I do that can I do something like that and and go away and do it, and that brings its own benefits you've got something to show when you go and talk to somebody it gives you ideas it keeps you sharp and so don't don't just.
Shaun: sit back and watch lots of application, that is, two different companies be proactive about the things that interest you.
Shaun: And I finds yeah that's pretty good about that we've come up with so he's come up with some good ideas in the company.
Shaun: And those ideas will bring your benefit and they'll stop you as last thing which really is a danger, you can you can go right right back to the production line if you're not careful.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 10 did you get a chance to talk about San a corporation, and maybe what kinds of projects, you guys work on there and what you look at maybe when you're hiring your data people.
Tim Kao: So, so I talked through a little bit in my intro, but I can certainly expand on it a little bit more.
Tim Kao: cna corporation's a federally funded research and development Center So if you think about like some university affiliated research centers that are.
Tim Kao: Like Johns Hopkins applied physics lab or MIT link labs where the nonprofit corporation equivalent of that, and so we we support navy and marine corps.
Tim Kao: With some of their biggest problems that they have, and if you can imagine what those might be it's fighter aircraft its submarines its surface ships it's helicopters.
Tim Kao: How do you keep them flying, how do you keep them running, how do you keep them deployed and supportive as national security of Defense space.
Tim Kao: The types of projects we're working on everything from predictive analytics in terms of which aircraft are going to fail, what types of supply chain parts need to be stocked evicting those types of ups and downs.
Tim Kao: In the availability of the aircraft or the availability of the submarines, how long they're going to be a maintenance cycle so pretty much the gamut of your machine learning techniques from just basic progression, as was discussed all the way out to deep learning neural networks.
Tim Kao: Fundamentally, I think it's, like the other panelists said, you have to have your blocking and tackling skills so you've got to be able to code in Python and are.
Tim Kao: You need some more Python or are actually for us, we don't really care as long as you can do one of them and and then you certainly need to be able to.
Tim Kao: have some fundamental just math and statistics, under your belt, and so the program you're going through set you up really well for that piece, and then, so what what differentiates you when I start to interview again we've hired about 10 people in the past year.
Tim Kao: Probably looked at hundreds of interviews to get down to those 10 hundred resumes to get down to that 10 and and probably conducted about 50 interviews to narrow it down to that, and so what what separated those 10 folks.
Tim Kao: Again, a lot of them come in with that initial criteria they can code in our code in Python they've got good fundamental math and statistics.
Tim Kao: The differentiator that we see a lot of times as a the folks actually understand the algorithm by just hey I can code in.
Tim Kao: psychic learn I can code and carrot and I can spit out a neural network or I can spit out a random forest, but then, when I tried to pull the layer and say Okay, can you tell me why.
Tim Kao: A random forest is designed the way it is or how its handling.
Tim Kao: stochastic gradient descent, or how neural network is choosing a review function versus a sigmoid function and its activation.
Tim Kao: Sometimes that that's challenging for folks to be able to talk through because all they know is hey I can plug and chug it.
Tim Kao: and run my project that I posted on linkedin but I don't actually understand the algorithm behind it so that's really kind of the next barrier that folks overcome and once they get past that.
Tim Kao: it's exactly what folks talked about it's that are they going to be good team players right because nothing we do.
Tim Kao: is based on you, being an individual genius right you can't sit in the corner run your machine learning algorithm and say here Look how good it is i've got a uc that's almost one.
Tim Kao: i've got really awesome emmys and Ms ease and it's really, really cool now you've got to be able to talk to the clients you'd be able to talk with your teammates you've got to be a good team player.
Tim Kao: Right, nobody wants to work with jerks and assholes and people that just aren't fun to work with, and so are you have those soft skills.
Tim Kao: And we're really reluctant to column soft skills, because we think they are hard right those skills are really, really difficult to master and so.
Tim Kao: Being able to effectively work with teammates talk to other people collaborate and find the best solution and be willing to give and take, that your ideas and always the best idea, a lot of times that's what's differentiates the people on the team.
Tim Kao: Because otherwise a lot of people can code, a lot of people can integrate and do algebra and and and differentiate but.
Tim Kao: The people that can really combine both the soft and hard skills, those are the ones that are really difficult to find and those are the people that we really value on our team.
MS Analytics Class 2021: AMI we heard from you yeah.
Abi Akogun: yeah I did talk about their process currently just like you just said.
Abi Akogun: Also we've had a team I think about six to seven analyst and liver scientists in the past year and currently we have an opening for data scientists, but that's not in writing.
Abi Akogun: that's on the business side i'm going to have their interview to get that person on board and ways and like you said we look 14 players as well.
Abi Akogun: I have up, we have two pages actually they were hired in the last two years, that you're right now, or because they can integrate rights they wanted to do my own thing you don't want to be a team player.
Abi Akogun: And we use a lot of get reports as well, so this guy is now on the committee, a code for people in the same to review, you know they want to do the.
Abi Akogun: same rights there's no collaboration right, so does it kind of seems to look out for we wanted to be a good team player like I always tell people, I do not need a marathoner rights.
Abi Akogun: I want someone that can be a team player, because I believe some skills can be taught but.
Abi Akogun: If anything player right then there's no points I can put you in front of my VP of clinical analytics or my CMO CMO right those guys don't understand anything to do right in terms of coding right.
Abi Akogun: There needs to be able to determine things down and be able to at least work with your teams to get the job done so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Healthcare world these days, keeping you busy.
Abi Akogun: very busy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah.
Definitely.
Ziad: I have, I have maybe one one kind of little bit of insight about keeping the skills up and kind of creating that question so.
Ziad: You know, for anybody who is a runner out there, you know, one of the things you always do is to keep your running skills as you always sign up to races you're always racing.
Ziad: You always training for races and that's how you keep your skills up right for from a branding perspective.
Ziad: So likewise here what I what I always advise people to do there's a lot of great meetups in Houston sign, I mean covert has been sort of bad for letting people meet, but things are sort of opening up and there are a lot of virtual.
Ziad: meetups sign up to be a speaker go go get your presentation and there's nothing better than.
Ziad: You know kind of work in your skills and actually being willing to put yourself out there and be embarrass yourself in front of 5060 people to show your your stats skills or machine learning skills, so I know abby has.
Ziad: had his meetups and you know there's quite a few meetups in Houston and a lot of meetups around the country so wherever you are, you should in your town, you should be able to kind of participate and do this, and I think this is one way of keeping your skills sharp.
Abi Akogun: And as a good point he had and that's why I finally made up in Houston before I actually get employed as a data scientist, I love the Program.
Abi Akogun: I will still be a milestone as a network engineer, I was working with verizon for 10 years plus and before I got into the doing real design stuff.
Abi Akogun: I was trying to meetups in Houston and I see her on them, I still have one in Dallas so I have to right now the one in Dallas calling not accessing the one in this thing is called the carry machine learning so.
Abi Akogun: Those up Neil Walker the most of the things I do when I started working on job with the skills or simple to put together, while doing all these meetups besides what I did in the Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Did you guys get to talk about entrepreneurial endeavors.
Shaun: yeah I talked a little bit about.
Shaun: Studying up the business and my good fortune of meeting the Ziad and how difficult it is to actually come across people who can work with you.
Shaun: i'll say a couple of things about entrepreneurial startups first of all, no matter how many degrees you've got your most valuable asset or your contacts.
Shaun: If you don't have contacts out there, amongst people in the industries that you're going to work in.
Shaun: You it's very, very hard to make them so go to conferences meet people keep a good list of contacts, you can talk about and talk to when you when you want when you want to work, the business, the other is actually opening a business.
Shaun: So it's a little bit more difficult than it seems you've got.
Shaun: A lot of legislation to get through, you have to register the company get any if you have to put together proposals you have to put together job offers you have to protect your IP.
Shaun: And, and it can it can be pretty endless and you can put your foot into tracks that will stay with you for the rest of your life if you're not careful.
Shaun: And and lawyers are expensive, so it pays to figure out all the legal things that you're going to have to do and what they really mean before you open up your company and then you need to decide what kind of company what we're an escort a small Corporation.
Shaun: I didn't want to take, we want to form it out and see those an llc really is, you know a lot of people working together.
Shaun: Who won't take responsibility for what they're doing and that's not very attractive actually in the industry, most of the industry likes to work with some kind of cooperation and they'll accept an inspiration and that's one of the reasons why it's good to go with the next call.
Shaun: But again it's just you're very careful, you have to define the roles quite well people have to understand what the CEOs going to do, or what a CEO is going to do, and what their legal responsibilities are because once you've got me I N and you're an s corp.
Shaun: The offices in the company had fiduciary responsibilities and then what.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I said i'm cracking up the water Ai is changing it to escort so you have an escort.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Company, but you're saying s as in Sam court right.
daniel cota: He runs escort service i'm.
Shaun: Saying.
s corp.
Shaun: yeah an s corporation, as opposed to the sequel gration.
Shaun: Okay well anyway that's that's that's those of you that want to start on a school Corporation.
Shaun: you're on the wrong course.
MS Analytics Class 2021: tiffany to pass out what other questions to class it's funny it's funny one have.
Matt McGuinness: So kind of going back to some things, how did you go about finding the meetups or you know starting networking we've all got obviously ourselves, you know within the cohort we can talk to, and we know some of the previous cohort and the next cohort but.
Ziad: When I go to find that.
That ml.
Ziad: So starting meetup costs you if you want to start you on meetup it cost you $80 a year.
Ziad: Invite some friends put yourself out there and you'll be surprised, people will show up just pick a topic and go for it finding it up to speed up calm, so it is actually very easy to find people find like minded people find all those events and it's not hard at all to to to get there.
paloma urbano: Along the same lines, I actually have a question have any of you done participating, one of the cargo competitions, because I always thought on doing that I started to look at the data and then run out of time to go and submit anything has any of you done that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah.
Matt McGuinness: A couple of us did the humana competition when it came around in this fall I guess last fall so.
Matt McGuinness: That was a lot of fun, it was a lot of work goes a lot of fun at the end of it so.
paloma urbano: Well, I just thought it would be a good way to keep up with the skill sets as well.
Abi Akogun: And you're right, so one thing I find very common with healthcare, these days, especially the.
Abi Akogun: The payoff space, which is health insurance you're trying to do a lot of automation rights, so they are a lot of claims flying around.
Abi Akogun: And the other, make a lot of analytics that go to disclaim to look for like doctor's name my patient name patient age like bills.
Abi Akogun: So what you're trying to do is you're trying to use a little extract so that comes natural language processing rights that comes to image recognition right so.
Abi Akogun: There are different approaches, so the output that i've taken in the past is build like it takes crossfire model so when you have these documents coming.
Abi Akogun: you're going to see our first like comedies Google cloud azure cloud you have some ocr services so take text out of that.
Abi Akogun: And then the next day, but you want to do is build a text classifier so for each form, you want to put them in a particular bucket.
Abi Akogun: And for each of those buckets you want to build like a colleague named entity recognition right.
Abi Akogun: And I can go in there and extract those information that people are manually going through resumes and a lot of money, but it does light of vcs that are people going to lose their jobs right.
Abi Akogun: Like, what are the ones that I worked on about 230 analysts will only look for you right so air is you know to meet all that, but the good deal is for you guys, you have the skills.
Abi Akogun: To do this stuff right so i'm just i've been thinking of it, but you are the skill to begin guide to take the company forward so so so that's something good going around the store in healthcare automation have a lot of paper based clinics.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Does anyone have anything to share, about the consulting world.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And I don't know if you consider your stuff consulting or see ya.
daniel cota: know so I could I could share a little bit so before you know I did spend four years in consulting and.
daniel cota: You know, is it was it was pretty interesting because I was kind of that hybrid between helping clients with strategy and execution.
daniel cota: And so it really helped From that perspective, just learning the skills that I did through this program because.
daniel cota: Once again, it was you know, having a good understanding of the overall processes and how things work together and so forth, but then.
daniel cota: Also, being able to get deep dive into some of the programming and some of the algorithms and so forth.
daniel cota: And so that helped with the conversations with both the executives and the technical professionals of the different clients that i've worked.
daniel cota: Work with so that was helpful from that perspective if you're interested in getting to some into something like that there's.
daniel cota: You know it's it's it's pretty broad right now, I think that there's still a pretty good demand within the consulting field.
daniel cota: And I think that you know there's definitely some opportunity there.
daniel cota: To provide some value and that's one thing as far as consulting goes you you'll definitely be thrown into a lot of different scenarios, a lot of different.
daniel cota: situations that you, you know you might have to quickly overcome it could be challenging at times because you have to act quickly on your feet, but also.
daniel cota: It gives you a lot of in depth experience with multiple industries multiple different algorithms that you would use and so forth, and, to be honest with you that's actually.
daniel cota: Some of the key skills that I garnered from this program and through consulting actually helped me get my role at gartner because.
daniel cota: You know that's what I do I do research, but I also talked to clients about certain things and being able to cover multiple industries really helped me get into gartner so consulting was was helpful in that regard.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Thank you so much Panel for joining us this evening and sharing your wealth of knowledge and information and your experience with the class of 2021 so you'll have about 50 new alumni to network and have fun with, so thank you very much.
Swanson J, Charles: Thank you.
Matt McGuinness: Thanks.
Fireman, Karen: So much.
daniel cota: Thank you everyone, you know.
daniel cota: With the capstones and everything else.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One more week.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In a transition and five minutes, thank you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I see you had to go mobile I appreciate you joining tonight.
Tim Kao: yeah thanks for having me enjoyed it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Thank you.
students.
To the air.
Okay.
say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: zero.
felicia.
A lot.
This show you guys, how do I get my Apps.
So I always access to it.
and
once was.
me.
So.
here.
Yes, okay.
Fireman, Karen: Oh shit he started.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Before I go into the review thing that I usually do in the beginning, I wanted to see if anybody had any questions about the final exam.
Amanda Pham: I thought we don't have a final exam it's just been.
elizabeth Wright: My.
Coleman, Clay: I think.
Fireman, Karen: I think it's April fool's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Very.
Very.
Zuberi, Bilal: We already.
Jordan Gross: We already wasn't even ready for that house.
Jordan Gross: Because fantastic.
Jim Clark: you're testing our listening skills.
Yes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so now now start.
Amanda Pham: We.
Amanda Pham: Have a quick question you're going to have one of our homework right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have, I have graded one of your homework yes.
Amanda Pham: um but in the syllabus it mentioned like dropping the lowest homework, are you going to do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Hopefully i'm going to let you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do all of them before I decide which one to drop.
Amanda Pham: Okay, thank you, yes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just to remind you that what we concentrated on in the last lecture was.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is the picture of the typical pocket model program and there are a couple of areas where.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We are either getting input to the model program or creating output from the pocket model program and those are the areas that we talked about in the last lesson or lecture so in terms of input we were reading data from SAS data sets and I mentioned that you can.
MS Analytics Class 2021: convert other.
MS Analytics Class 2021: data storage options such as excel spreadsheets to SAS data sets using SAS procedures and then read them in a SAS data set so it's not as limiting that may appear.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And as far as output is concerned when we're modeling we're making changes or corrections to our code oftentimes will want is just to using either print or put.
MS Analytics Class 2021: create some output, that we can access very quickly and then, when the model becomes production, then we're more interested in creating SAS data sets, and in fact I showed you a way, using.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A solver option to make it so that, when you say solve it doesn't even print the the solution summary table and the problem summary table.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, in studio it actually shows you the data sets in that same tab where the program exists, so in some sense the data sets can be more immediate feedback.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But oftentimes they're probably too large to give us the information that we need, so we need some kind of summary statistics for a large model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so I have a slide that I converted from Christmas slide to an Easter slide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To kind of demonstrate the so what the process becomes here, so there is the Easter bunny and he has data sets that he reads in which tell him how well the children have behaved.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And what their desires are in their Easter baskets and his program should decide what to put in all the children's Easter baskets and he'll have to deliver them because everyone's staying at home for Easter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: He may want to create some summary statistics for the what we call the Easter industrial complex to make sure that there are enough baskets and artificial grass various colors in plastic Easter eggs necessary to put the baskets together.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, in terms of the syntax of pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We talked about print and put statements for output print is a vanilla format statement but it's very easy to use has some.
MS Analytics Class 2021: nuances but you can't control, a lot of things about the print statement, in fact, you may have been dismayed by your inability to change the column headers in the print statement when you were doing the exercise.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You have more control over some of those things when you're creating such data sets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Put statement is primitive but has a lot of formatting controls which you can look up if you're interested in them, but since it's primarily used for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Either debugging complicated programs or listing the elements of a set that's something that you really probably want a lot of attractive poodle at wanna told me not something that you want to put a lot of time into coming up with attractive formatting commands for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I mentioned that the reading create data statements have a fairly similar structure that kind of parallel, if you will.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's either read data into our create data from the first little blank areas where the name of the SAS data set and possibly also the name of the library goes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then, after the from or the into our the either for read data statement there read key column or columns and then the Read columns that tell.
MS Analytics Class 2021: pocket model where to get the information, where, to put it, and in the created a statement basically the same except for things are reversed, because the target and source are switched around we're going from pocket model to assess data set instead of the other way around.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you printed the handout.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are pages for the reading create data statement so they're helpful to have around when you're trying to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Get the format right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, and then in terms of what we have available to write out mentioned that pocket model when we create a model element decision variable rate decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Family of constraints array of implicit variables create various suffix parameter raised that store information about the model elements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Such as for a constraint, the lower bound the upper bound and the body.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A couple of the model elements had.
MS Analytics Class 2021: suffix parameter arrays that referenced something called dual valleys and that's what i'm going to start talking off tonight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some explain or clear up some of the seriousness of that those suffix parameter raise.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll talk about dual values all talk about something called reduce costs over these prophets and i'll try and explain how dual values are used to guide primarily the primal simplex algorithm they're also used in the dual simplex algorithm but it's the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: explanation is as much more complicated in that in that situation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the dual value is associated with each of the constraints in your model, and you can define it as follows.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It measures that change in the optimal objective value if you view the limit of that constraint is something that you can play around with.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so you can make it bigger or smaller and that'll affect the objective value, so the changing the objective value per unit, increasing the constraint limit is what we call the dual value and the easiest way to see that is to look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A graph.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're on the vertical axis, we have the objective and i'm using the furniture making model as an illustration so net profit was our objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the horizontal axis, I had the budget level, so we took our original furniture making problem we added a budget constraint that said.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can't spend more than 10,000 on the available resources so that that prevented us from using all of the resources and if you were to look at this graph here at 10,000, this is the objective value of our furniture making model, it was something 820 1.5.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, as we vary that limit either a little more than 10,000 or a little less the graph of the objective value as a function of that limit is piece wise linear and the slope of that segment, is what we call the dual value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The per unit increase so it's like the rise over the run it's the slope.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so it helps you understand how the model behaves or how related models behave as you change the limits of course if you change it by a lot.
MS Analytics Class 2021: you're going to be extrapolating right because things happen to the graph of the net profit as you go too far away from the value of 10,000 in fact.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This graph is only going from about 9500 to a little more than 10,000 you can imagine, extending it all the way down to zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: right because he could have a budget level of zero, in which case you wouldn't be able to make anything and your net profit would be zero so it may have more little elbows on its way down to the point 00.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that kind of begs the question well what if our original model had had.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A value of the limit that is that one of these little breakpoints when a little elbows of the of the graph.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, in that case the dual value wouldn't be as wouldn't be well defined by that definition, it could either be the slope of this line.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or it could be the slope of this line or in a complicated situation, not in this model, it might be somewhere in between those things okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But for almost all of the values of the limit the dual value gives us the slope of one of these lines, and so it gives us useful information in an extreme case.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It might be that if we decrease it at all, we might be extrapolating or if we increase it all, we might be extrapolating but the typical cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: looks like this Okay, and there are ways of of determining how far you can move to the right and to the left before it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: behaves differently, I can share a program that does that it's actually something that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i've been after the developers to include in as part of the output it's simple thing to calculate but evidently there's not enough customer demand, so they want to do something that's more fun for them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let me illustrate this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For our two dimensional example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we we looked at this two dimensional linear programming problem we don't call it a model because it's just a numerical problem and we said as a unique salute optimal solution at the purple point there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: By virtue of solving the model we have these dual values available and so it's just part of the solution process, I can list them here, so we have our three general constraints, the X plus y is it most.
MS Analytics Class 2021: has a dual value 8.5.
MS Analytics Class 2021: X plus three wise most to 25 has a smaller dual value of 3.5.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the red constraint, has a dual value of zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That seems a little unusual, but maybe we can think about that, if we took the red constraint and change this limit by a small amount, plus or minus.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Would that affect the solution.
know.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where because I remarked.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A couple of weeks ago that this constraint is called redundant, in other words it's not necessary to describe the feasible region.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It doesn't have any contribution it doesn't carve out any of the points that are not feasible, so if we have a constraint like this it's dual value is all going to always going to be zero and, in fact, we can see a little bit more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: At the optimal solution, and he constraint that is not tight is going to have a dual value of zero, so this is a notion that you may have seen if you did some of the suggested exercises.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and inequality is tight if it satisfied with the quality, so at this optimal solution to to black constraints are tight any constraint that's not tight has a little wiggle room and you can move it in or out, and so the dual value is going to be zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: they're not always redundant constraints this constraint is never tight some other constraints might be tight for some points, but not for other points.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's illustrate this property of the dual value predicting how the objective value changes as we change the right hand sides of the constraints so let's look at this constraint here X plus y is it most analyse let's take this one here X plus three, why is it most to 25.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I increase the limit two to 26 it's going to move kind of imperceptibly up so to see a little bit bigger change i'm going to change it by five so instead of 225 i'm going to have the constraint be less than or equal to 230.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You know i'll show you what happens here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it moves up barely enough to see these I think these squares are each five units.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And and changing the right hand side of the limit by five.
MS Analytics Class 2021: doesn't always move it up or down by a square it depends on what the coefficients of the inequality are but that's enough that you could see the change.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We would predict that the objective value would increase because we're increasing the right hand side or the limit and the amount that it would increase would be five times 3.5.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, if you were to calculate the objective value of this point, you would find it that's exactly this the the predicted change if I bumped it up by five more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's a total increase of 10 now it's easier to calculate from our original objective that would have gone up by 10 times 3.5 or 35.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, and and doing genius level math that would have told us that the first one increased by 17.5 but you probably multiplied the five times 3.5 in your head.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if you if you calculate the objective value of this point the prediction is exactly correct, so you can see that the optimal solution is moving along this line.
MS Analytics Class 2021: in that direction, and if we did it again the dual value would correctly predict the change in the objective value to this point here okay Okay, you can imagine doing it more and more, if you want let's try the other one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This was the one that has a slightly larger dual value so you could say in some sense the model is more sensitive to changes and limit here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But again that's modulo you know we could calculate this constraint using different units like I slightly changed from ounces two pounds your homework assignment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so it's it's it's kind of relative to the units and relative to how big the coefficients are in the inequality how meaningful big is in this measure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we don't want to always compare apples to oranges here just because this is bigger doesn't mean the model is more sensitive to this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, so let's look at change and i'll bump it up by five again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'll change this inequality to X plus y is less than or equal to 122, and so we expect to see the same thing it moves along the other line now to this purple point and if I was to calculate the the difference between the two objective values, it would be exactly five times 8.5.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, try and bump it up again to 127.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, this time the predicted point would be the intersection of those two black lines, but it couldn't go that far, because one of the other constraints came into play.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so now that we're done a constraint is actually doing something useful here, so this is kind of the equivalent of going past the elbow on the graph that I showed you from the furniture making problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can always look at the dual value and get a conservative estimate of how things are going to change it might be an over estimate, but it's never going to us under estimate the change in the objective value Okay, because some other model elements might come into play.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it gives you hopefully some notion of what's going on with the dual values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So how do we get them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, there are suffix parameter raise and if we have a family of constraints called usage and usage duel is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Likewise indexed parameter right so usage is indexed by resources so usage duel is indexed by resources it's a parameter array that holds the dual values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Budget is a single constraint budget duel is a parameter and that describes how the model behaves if you change the budget limit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if I print those things in the results tab I get a table for the first one, and just a value for the second one, and so this slope here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Of point oh five is the slope that you saw in the graph you might say, well, it didn't look like point oh five let's because the axes were scaled differently okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we look at the dual values of the constraints here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You may remember from the output of the furniture making problem where we printed them out used the Labor constraint was tight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The word constraint miss tight when we just express those in plain English we use all of the available Labor we used all of the available wood.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we had metal leftover so that that was that would be translated here in the same the metal constraint is not tight, you can see that the dual value of the metal constraint zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, because if we are using all the metal we have having a little more metal is not going to do any good for us right we weren't using what we had anyway.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so how can we use this information.
MS Analytics Class 2021: about the model, well, we can answer some simple kind of what if questions here's one in this case, so that the Labor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: constraint, the Labor usage constraint, has a positive dual value that says that if we had more Labor we can increase our net profit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We have currently 225 hours of Labor available we had more we can increase our net profit, so how can we get more Labor well when we could get it, as we could pay overtime right there may be other sources of Labor available to us.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if we.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Pay overtime workers time and a half the nominal cost of Labor is $14 to pay them $21.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Would we use any of those overtime hours to potentially increase our net profit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, we can answer that question by looking at the dual value of Labor 1.3.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And at first blush it seems like 21 is much bigger than 1.3 So the answer would definitely be no well, you always have to be careful when.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Applying the dual values about what is and what isn't counted in your model what I mean by that is that the model already includes the $14 charge for Labor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when I want to consider these overtime hours, I need to look at the incremental costs, which is $7 and compare that incremental cost.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To the dual value of the Labor constraint, and in this case it gets the same answer because seven is bigger than 1.3 so if we use an overtime our.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Our net profit will go up by 1.3 dollars, but it would go down by $7 because we're paying $7 more than the cost that's included in the model okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we're going to have to resort to something like mass hypnosis if we're going to get our workers to come in and do overtime for say $15 and 25 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We might want to look at some temporary Labor that would be available at that at that cost, so the dual value can answer the question without you having to run the model without you having to modify the model and running right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But oftentimes, the answer is either no or yes, maybe in this case, I can definitely say no, it would be unprofitable to use overtime.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if the cost of overtime was $15 and 25 cents and I was comparing 1.252 1.3 that would say it appears that that will be profitable.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it might be that there's something else in the model that prevents us from using the overtime we're kind of at one of those little elbows so we have to say kind of tentatively, yes, but I need to do a little bit more work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: At that point you'd have to actually modify your model to count for the overtime and run it to see how many hours of overtime, you would want to use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that's one way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: in which the dual values are useful here's another way another kind of a What if type of question.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well it's possible that there are other products that we could manufacture we, in addition to desks tables book frames and bedrooms and bookcases maybe we could make i'm sorry desk chairs, we can make tables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Currently we're not looking at that option, but if we want to make tables, we can kind of, say, oh, what can I sell tables for maybe 98 bucks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How much of my resources will be required, we can estimate those requirements and then based on that try and decide whether tables look like a profitable activity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we calculate the net profit for a table, we take the selling price subtract off the resource costs and we're looking at $14 and that sounds.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Pretty attractive.
MS Analytics Class 2021: On the other hand.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at the net profits for two other products, the net profit for desks, I pointed out when we first formulated the furniture names.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and expanded, it was $13 Okay, but we're not making desks, so that made me think well, maybe I shouldn't make tables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But chairs have a net profit of $12 and we're making chairs so maybe the net profit by itself doesn't tell the whole story, what we need to account for is that if we decide to make a table that takes away three hours of Labor.
MS Analytics Class 2021: pounded metal into cubic feet of wood and those resources have a value, above and beyond their cost right because we're turning a net profit using those resources, so what measures the opportunity cost of not using those resources to make.
MS Analytics Class 2021: shares bookcases in bed frames haha it's the dual value because diverting those resources away from our profitable activities to tables is basically saying let's decrease the availability of those things and then see how much we can make making the table, so if we account for that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The cost of the reduced availability of our resources.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, making a table is three hours of Labor a unit of metal and see these are the dual practice i'm multiplying by to to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think it's pounds of metal at one pound of metal to cubic feet of wood to 45 and there's also an opportunity costs for the budget, because those resources were taking away costs something.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That rolls out to be $13 and now, if we compare these two things, making a table is a plus to the tune of $14 and a minus the tuna, the net is one right so that's actually what we were referred to as a reduced profit of making tables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that calculation shows that we would be, we would have incentive to make tables now if we included tables in the model it's possible that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: they're not included, but it's likely that we make tables right because there are some aspects of the model that are not counted by the dual values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The possibilities we might be at one of those little elbow points Okay, so this is called pricing an activity or pricing out an activity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we can imagine doing it, as in a scenario like this we're trying to consider an activity that's not currently in the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But this is the same thing that the primal simplex algorithm does in every iteration it has a set of activities or products that it's currently producing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we can calculate temporary dual values, to see how much our resources are worth, given that production pattern.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then we can compare activities that we're not currently doing to see if any of those are profitable if we find a profitable one we bring it in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: recalculate the dual values and we repeat repeat repeat, so these temporary dual values are used in the primal simplex algorithm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To decide where to go next as it moves around the outside of the feasible region so you can imagine that that is a good explanation for why they would be available at the end they're kind of used as an intermediate calculation and each iteration.
MS Analytics Class 2021: they're there because nothing more to calculate so all of the algorithms for solving linear programming models calculate dual values as part of the solution process.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me do look a little bit in SAS studio for this furniture making model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to go ahead and see if it's loaded loaded.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to go into the demos for less than two and just let me reiterate, there was some confusion someone asked about a question about.
MS Analytics Class 2021: lectures and lessons there's not an exact correspondence between lectures and lessons we've spent several lectures in lesson to lesson is just as his way of saying chapter of the notes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there's a DEMO in here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: called furniture duel open that up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: See you can see i'm feeding the budget level in using a macro variable i'm reading the data from SAS data sets for everything else, these are the SAS data sets that we've seen versions of them in the op library.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Once i've solved the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to print the dual values for the usage constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And, together with that just to demonstrate how a constraint only has a positive dual value if it's tight i'm going to print them out used in availability.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because if I look at it a bit about using availability, I can tell whether it's tight or not right, whether there's whether i'm using all of the available resources in those cases.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the budget constraint, I would compare total cost and I don't really have a parameter name for the budget level, I have a macro variable but i'm just going to look pull up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Budget up that's the upper bound Okay, so I mentioned that sometimes we have other names for the suffix parameters, sometimes we don't, in which case we can just use them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then i'm also going to print the dual values for the decision variables, because that seems like a kind of a mysterious thing, but when we.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When we looked at the different suffix parameter arrays there was one for decision variables and the only value, I can think of to compare that to his nonprofit so let's let's run that, and you can ignore the thing at the bottom, for the time being I won't look at that right away.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's look at the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: oops something strange is going on, maybe I should.
MS Analytics Class 2021: have a lot of results here, but I have something highlighted let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: must have had something highlighted let's try it again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what lesson going alright, so we printed the tables for the parameter arrays, and this is always a good idea.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When you're starting out with a model, just to make sure the information is getting into the right places.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And things kind of bypass it because we've seen this model, a number of times problem summary table solution summary table or the objective value we've seen before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so here's our here's our dual values, so let me get so we can see them all, all the ones that are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: fit to print here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here's the point 05 1.3 2.4 or five that you saw on the slide and in the expanded table, you can see that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the Labor constraint, we use all of the available Labor, so I would say that constraint is tight dual value is positive.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The metal is not tight right we don't use all the available metal dual values zero word is tight positive do value, likewise the budget constraint is tight positive dual value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's look at this table above now this dual value is relative to a constraint, but what are constraints that are associated with the decision variables does that even make sense.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's let's pick on on bed frames here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Are there any limits or restrictions on the number of bed frames, we can produce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Obviously, makes 57.5 can we make negative 10 bed frames.
Swanson J, Charles: No.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That would be a trick wouldn't it so what prevents us from making minus 10 bed frames.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Other than physical impossibility.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What in the model prevents us from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Making minus 10 bed frames.
Are constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It is a constraint is very simple constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we look in the code where we've declared our decision variables are declared to be non negative so while that's a bound it's also a constraint.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It limits the number of in that case, the number of bed frames, to be greater than or equal to zero, so what would it mean if we increase the limit of that constraint by one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Instead of making at least zero bed frames, it would say you should make at least one bed frame.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, well, what would what would change in the solution if I changed lower bound for bed friends to be one would it change the solution at all.
Swanson J, Charles: No, because we're already making.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah we're making oodles and scads of those things right, so that wouldn't change the objective value, and so the dual value of zero is exactly what we would expect.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So another way to think of this is because we're making bed frames bookcases and chairs those non negativity constraints are not tight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right they're not equalities they're strictly inequalities, so all these dual values are zero What about desks we're not making any desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that constraint is tight, what is this minus one telling us well let's say we change the limit on desks from greater than equal to zero, to greater than equal to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's try and translate that into English, you have to make at least one desk right well what would happen to our objective value if we made a desk.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Our net profit will go down right that's why we're not making desks and how much would it go down by.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It would go down by minus one or i'm sorry it would go down by one unit so increase the right hand side or limit this is the effect on the objective, it would go down that's precisely why we're not making desks Okay, because there are unprofitable, given our current production.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now, how How does this minus one get calculated will silly model calculates for us, but what formula would it be using to calculate that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It would be doing the exact same calculation that we did for tables, it would be taking the selling price of desks subtracting off the opportunity cost of making a desk because that would mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: diverting resources away from other profitable activities, but the result of that calculation would be minus one for desks as opposed to tables, where we get a plus one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that actually tells you something about the model it tells you that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the selling price of desks were to increase by one then desks would be breakeven activity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If the selling price of deaths were to increase by more than one it's likely that we've start policing desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we can see that easily enough.
MS Analytics Class 2021: By just putting an assignment statement in before the model itself.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's go down here, just before the self statement and let's add in an assignment statement there's a couple of ways we can do this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We could say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: selling price, and this is a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: step to catch me if I make a few errors selling price well more than a few at this time, Prince, am I trying to do this it's just natural desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what's the current selling price of deaths.
Coleman, Clay: Well, if you're.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 94 okay so so we could just increase it to say 95.01 stuff anymore.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you didn't know well, because you can you can look at the table that was producing the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right so it's easy enough to figure out what the selling price of desks is, in this case, but if we didn't have the table available to us, we could also say selling price of desks equals selling price of desks plus 1.01.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right soon assignment statement doesn't just have to have a value if you look back at the text box for assignment statements, it was equal to expression.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can use it to increment detriment scale up scale down, you can use it in any of those ways, but this is perhaps the simplest way so let's just make that change and see what happens so we would expect that the model would start producing desks let's see if it in fact does.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And they are your desks so it's not only making desk is making 26 desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That that must really have increased our net profit right let's check.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A whopping 18 21.7 618 21.5 went up by 26 cents, who bonus.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, we kind of could have predicted that, because if we plug the increase of 1.01 into that formula, it would have given us reduce profit of one cent for desks, and so, as we made each desk or net profit would go up by a cent, so this is kind of as predicted.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the other thing that may be useful to point out here is that, in terms of how the solution changed.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We were making a lot of bookcases before now we're making Almost none alright so that's kind of the big change in our production.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With the model is not counting changes from some nominal production schedule as having any associated costs so we've really overhauled, the solution to this model in order to make 26 cents.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But the model is just going to well, sometimes I said that the LP solver is ruthless so it's it's as excited about the first million, as it is by last penny just keeps grinding until it finds the actual optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so you can see that the dual values have some utility for the constraints and also for the decision variables that are in the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the form of those reduce costs over these profits so puts the maximization problem, reduce profit makes more sense to us if it's a minimization problem, reduce costs right because it's a matter of what we're comparing the objective function coefficient two.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in some sense the canonical LP model is a cost minimization those pessimists so you can use darcy interchangeably with dual for decision variables, but you can't use rp doesn't accept that So if you want to be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you want to be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: neutral about it, you can always say dual.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me go back to the code and i'm just going to back that out or changing the selling price and all my spelling errors.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let's run it again and look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What the last tables tell us.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I kind of skipped these at first, but these two tables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: are useful in a sense that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In a model, you may have many different types of decision variables and array here and re there are a couple of oddballs here and there, you might have different families have constraints and so so writing out dot dual dual dual dual is a lot of work, but you can get everything.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Using the internal referencing that pocket models solver uses so here's all the decision variables there's four of them and they're doing values that's not a really a big deal because they're all in non prod here's all four of the constraints, together with their dual values right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what pocket model does is it doesn't care about the problem context it only cares about the numbers, so it uses numerical indexing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And just kind of carries the name along in order to produce labels, at the end, so the very name and the con name are not used in the solution process they're just used to create the the solution to the model that you can appreciate with context, so if we go and look at the code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can see that we're using the numeric the numeric indexing of the solver.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To produce the dual values of all the variables and all the constraints at once, so if that's if that's got used to me has some utility, then you can use those as well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, again underscore our underscore is an array of decision variables and it has suffix parameters like dual, but it also has a special one called name, which is the label.
MS Analytics Class 2021: underscore con underscore is all the constraints and they have bodies lower bounds upper bounds dual values and also this special name, which is their label.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you remember, and this is going back a ways when we introduced the declaration of constraints I said it's always good practice to get your constraints in name.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if you don't pick up model generates a name for them called underscore a con underscore and then starts numbering them so there's a all the cons and then there's the anonymous cons okay there's so there's internal referencing for both of those things.
MS Analytics Class 2021: don't worry it's it's not on the final.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's do something fun new thinking what is he considered to be fun.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you may have noticed in the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the course notes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There was a link provided to menu builder from McDonalds and so thank you back to the slideshow here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to talk about an or model relative to I can get to this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, here we go right, this is a problem that doesn't typically happen in mcdonald's but i'm going to describe to you in this setting at mcdonald's This is called a diet problem and in the context that will use it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you had to eat all of your meals at mcdonald's for one day I realized for some of you that could be a stretch to meet your.
MS Analytics Class 2021: US recommended daily allowances for various nutrients, how could you that minimum costs now people don't solve this model to eat at mcdonald's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Typically, this model is solved in practice for things like animal feed, where we say, how can we meet the the daily requirements of a swine at minimum costs right, but to make it a little bit more fun.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Someone did a case study of this problem, using only food from McDonalds, and so I think this was in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the late 80s so i'm going to use the prices, the frozen in time for when that when that appeared Okay, so if the prices you think they all will be lower in the good old days in the late 80s, but some of them were actually higher because they didn't have dollar menu pricing back then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Before I jump into the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me show you just a little bit of the data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I think, someone might need to mute or speak up if you wanna if you want to have a rap battle.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'll leave it up to you this process OK so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The first data set gives you all the nutritional requirements and it's it's not there's only like 13 different nutrients so it's the heavy hitters, but we have things like calories and calories from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in order to get just a selection i've chosen everything that starts with the letter C that's what this were equals data set option is doing so i'm picking up all of the nutrients that start with C.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And units of measurement is not something we will use, but in case you're curious i've included that column so some of the US already requirements are lower bounds only some of them are upper bounds only and some of them are range so calories, and this is really.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is back in the good old days, where there was one us rba wasn't based on gender body type anything like this everybody should have at least 2000 calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We look at CREST cholesterol.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Everybody should have at most 375 milligrams of cholesterol.
MS Analytics Class 2021: carbohydrates in grams should be between 350 and 375.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and calcium should be at least 100% of the US RTA and so you just like reading those nutritional labels so things like calcium, and all your vitamins are given in a percentage basis.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This calories from fat is a little.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Strange the US already requirement for calories from fat says that no more than 30% of your calories should be calories from fat.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That doesn't translate to a specific upper and lower bound, because it depends on the number of calories in your diet which isn't fixed, it could be anything 2000 or low larger so for the moment i'm just putting missing values for both of those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well we've seen one other data set with missing values that was in the breakout exercise the previous week where you had a product mix type problem, you had the six different types of beer and ALE and the ingredients that went into them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So some recipes didn't include all the ingredients they had a missing value and you kind of had to impute will what would that missing value correspond to in that case, it was a zero right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when we have missing values in this diet problem we have to think the same thing, so if there's no lower bound.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we have to use numerical parameters or parameter arrays what makes sense for the lower bound to be if it's missing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Likewise, if we have a maximum an upper bound if it doesn't have a value as a missing value there's no no upper bound what value should we use there because we're going to have to use some value.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What do you think about that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because if we assign missing values to the parameter arrays we asked the solver to start doing arithmetic with missing values we could get a numeric exception or crazy answers, not a good plan.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let me go in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and go back into studio.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this will be another new model it's not a very complicated one in terms of the constraints and the objective and so forth.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But hopefully it will reinforce some of the ideas about the syntax and the reading and so forth, so let me go and open up mcdonald's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so like any good prakash model program it starts off with set some parameters, so I have, I can show you the data sets if that's helpful to you can see that I have the any tr our eq data set that I showed you part of, and another one called food data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's look at the the end one first.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's not much bigger than what I showed you there's like I said the heavy hitters you can see the men's on some matches on some the only one that has a range is carbohydrates.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at the food data, this is a little bit bigger data set, because this is all the different foods that you can get it at well whatever mcdonald's they chose to to to copy the menu from.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, like hamburgers at that time cost 69 cents bargain, to get them 59 cents now.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's see yeah so there's the 63 different things, and you might say, well, I really want to make rib it's not on there sorry out of luck and anything that was invented after late 80s, is also note on here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like the whatever that new.
MS Analytics Class 2021: mega chicken is whatever they call that thing trying to compete with wendy's and so forth alright so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can refer back to those if we need to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's go into mcdonald's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, in order to organize and store the data I need a set of foods it's going to be all those 63 foods, instead of nutrients is 12 nutrients.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There was also a column of the data set I look back into it again the Tony what type of food item I have so a hamburger cheeseburger are both on trace.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Whereas small Fries not an entree Okay, so one way to describe our diet that's a little bit more higher level than how many of each things we order just how many entrees you know how many sides and so forth, so i'm kind of keep track of those as well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in order to do that, I have a set of what are called food types that's just the entries in that type calm.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what they did to my looking at so every food at a type.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Every food at a cost, one is this character value the others numerical and then the nutritional contents right so that would be by nutrients and foods and it could be by foods come in nutrients, I just have to consistently use it in the same way throughout.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The here's what i'm going to use to initialize my missing values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have defined a constant called ooh, this is the closest I could come to the infinity symbol, this is sashes definition of infinity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what is constant big we've seen constant pie constant pie, is the value of the universal constant pie, to the machine machine precision, that we have constant big is the largest number that you can represent in your machine architecture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, since you can't have a number bigger than that essentially is infinity and that's what we're going to use for the missing values so for the upper bounds will use plus infinity for the lower bounce will use minus infinity.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You could also use zero for the lower bounds, or you could use some really, really big number like a 10,000 for the upper bound, but there are some numerical reasons why it's better to use plus and minus infinity and I may get into that a little bit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But 10,000 well it's kind of relative I mean.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Could I mean is 10,000 if anything is that going to be toxic mean what what's to say we should use 10 million, I think the only thing that mcdonald's that could be toxic because maybe vitamin A.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can only get toxic levels of vitamin A from eating polar bear meat and so unless your McDonalds is in the the great white North you probably going to be safe.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so apart from that, the real data statements are not terribly complicated, so we have a no miss option, because we have missing values.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when we read the one that has the US already requirements we populate nutrients the column that has the nutrients in it was called name reading Max and Min RTA into parameter rays of the same name, so we don't need to do a translation there's no equal signs there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For the food data, it has a block of data, like the furniture making problems, so we haven't iterated read.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're iterating of the nutrients, because those are the columns of The dataset, it also has two other columns called typing cost and the real key column his name at indexes the data so that's like cheeseburger hamburger small Fries.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again, if this part is confusing I just copied this from another read data statement and just kind of started randomly making changes until it works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: alright.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the last one here, this is a little bit tricky so think back to the Read data statement so many parts are optional right, so the real key column was optional the the Read columns were optional the set name was optional many things are optional.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is a really pared down read data statement all that's going on in this read data statement is it's populating this set food types right so it's going to the type column which i'll show you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's type is entre entre entre entre entre side side side entre entre so it's it's populating food types by reading and looking at for all distinct values in a type column okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And since there are a number of duplicates here we'll we'll see that that generate some warnings harmless enough.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that gives us food types just to show you that some of the information that's new here, let me put the food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then i'll print the types for all the foods that begin with the letter C, because otherwise we get a table that's much too large to to do any good for anyone so let's let's read it, and just look at that first part.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So those are the different types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see, in addition to entrees insides other interesting stuff.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And here are the types of everything that begins with the letter C.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, showing off my my knowledge of South programming limited as it is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let's see let's go back into the code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here are my variables it just tells us how much to buy of each food during that special day in your life.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i've decided that they should be non negative don't want you to think about what a negative value would correspond to their up that's too late, you already thought about it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have an implicit variable called intake which just calculate sums up all of the amounts of a particular nutrient over all the items that we buy so i'm multiplying number times content it's kind of like multiplying num prod times required same same thing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So these would be, I guess, if you want to think of it in this way, these would be kind of like column sums multiplied by the number of items that we buy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And to give us kind of high level view of the solution for each food type and sending all of the foods that have that type.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Their numbers, so I can figure out how many entrees how many drinks, how many sides so forth, because that's a useful way to give a high level description of the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because constraints pretty simple for every nutrient intake has to be between the Max and the men recommended daily allowance Okay, these are examples of range constraints.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we're allowed to have those in a pocket model Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: My objective is to minimize the total cost sending over all the foods, the unit costs times the number of items that I buy so again there's a kind of a lot of preamble set some parameters that when we get into the actual model elements it's pretty simple Program.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when i'm done i'm going to print, the solution, just the foods that I buy.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to print the total num break it down by categories and then i'm going to print a complicated looking table.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which is probably easier, just to see if we look at the results.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So already run the code so i'll just i'll drip down a little bit here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see it's a linear programming problem with 63 variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: 11 constraints or you might cry foul there because there's 12 nutrients Why are there only 11 constraints it's because the calories from fat is dropped from the model because it doesn't have an upper or lower bound.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That actually only happens if you use the plus and minus infinity if we do zero when we dropped it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's see now here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If I just solution $5 and 36 cents I don't think you can eat mcdonald's for three meals nowadays for that little amount of money, but there may be other problems let's let's look at the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, I can see problems making this order at mcdonald's already so what strikes you as odd about the solution anyone want to make a suggestion.
Coleman, Clay: 16 honey.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, I personally I love honey it's it's a it's a superfood I think they found honey any ferals tomb and the explorer is actually ate it and live.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Why is there that much honey in the model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we could look at our food data here for honey, we can find it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here it is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh it's free.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and
Coleman, Clay: The tires nutrients.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah it has calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: is now have a whole lot of anything else.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it's it anyway it's a free source of calories that explains why you might have included in the model solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, is it true that honey is free at mcdonald's.
Kilani, Shadi: No, because you have to buy something to get it right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah so it can it isn't it kind of isn't so what would you put honey on a mcdonald's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: chicken make nuggets right so when you buy your chicken nuggets you get like a 20 piece order of chicken nuggets they say how many how many packets, do you want.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, you can get sweet and sour sauce or you know honey mustard but so there's some foods and mcdonald's that you can get these condiments for free and that's why it has them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With a cost of zero in the model that explains why there's all that honey anything else about the model that that might be difficult to order.
Kilani, Shadi: The point 03 chunky chicken salad.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah that might be kind of hard to see right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There that's like three pieces of lettuce and a half.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Half a piece of tomato and maybe some carrot grated carrot in there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So our model is not asking the solution to be integers whereas mcdonald's typically expects people to order in integers so that's a shortcoming of the model that will address later on, but for now let's just kind of accept, as is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here's the the solution kind of broken down by the categories, you can see there's a lot of sauces because, in addition to the honey there's also sweet and sour sauce let's look at the tables below and see what they tell us.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And this, the syntax to produce this table was unpleasant, but the table itself is rather pleasant so for each nutrient it gives us the lower bound the upper bound, with the infinite value suppressed, because that would be annoying and it would also be in scientific notation which I hate.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It gives us the intake which should be between those bounds or below them or above them, depending on whether it has one or two, and you can check that that's the case for all of them, and then it has a dual value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now we said that the dual value is only going to be positive, or non zero if the constraint is tight so some of these constraints are not tight.
MS Analytics Class 2021: calories not tight calories from fat will obviously not take because there's no upper lower bound calcium tight carbohydrates tight, you can see it's against its upper bound.
MS Analytics Class 2021: right here, we have let's see there's here's iron tight protein tight i'm just comparing the intake to the upper and lower bounds right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so the ones that aren't tight i've suppressed, the printing of the dual value, which would be you would expect to be zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But could be something that would intolerances zero something that's less than something like 10 to the minus six so that'd be annoying to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So how to use the table, well, we can do kind of what if analysis type questions, we could say, well, how would the cost of our daily diet change if we allowed ourselves to have more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: More cholesterol or more carbohydrates, or if we required more protein in the diet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The dual values would describe how those changes impact or are likely to impact the cost of the diet, because again they they predict exactly and then as a certain point they extrapolate we just don't know quite what that certain point is so you can see that if you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you increase the requirement for calcium.
MS Analytics Class 2021: From 100% to say like I don't know if you were pregnant, maybe you would maybe boosted up to 150 or 200.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That would increase the cost right, whereas if you increase the sodium allowance from 3000 to say 4000 that's a lot of sodium the price will go down right because that lets you order more cheaper unhealthy foods in your diet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the dual values tell you how.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Various changes would impact the cost of the diet and there's an exercise in the suggested exercise that does precisely that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That goes through, and asked you a lot of what if type questions that you can kind of use as practice if you want before you start doing the homework for this week.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Finally, if we look at this table below and then after this we'll we'll go to breakout rooms for a fun exercise fun and educational exercise I printed the reduced costs of everything that I think that had the string.
MS Analytics Class 2021: chicken in it, or something like that or chick.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the only things that the only items that matched it well we're checking chicken salad.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now it's chicken chicken salad in the in this solution let's see chunky chicken salad chunky chicken salad here we go and it's dual value is or reduce costs, in this case, reduce costs, makes sense right zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because the objective is cost me chicken sandwich, on the other hand, is it in the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm not as such right So then, what is this value tell you about the chicken sandwich.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, think about the minus one four desks, it said that's how much the objective coefficient would have to change in order for it to come into the into the diet, we can interpret this 1.6349 in the same way.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This says that if we order to make chicken sandwich our costs would go up by $1 63.
MS Analytics Class 2021: turn that around and think about it another way, the cost of a chicken sandwich would have to go down by $1 63 for us to include it in our diet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right and there are other.
MS Analytics Class 2021: reduce costs for things that I didn't print.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because they're 63 foods and I wanted to conserve electrons here.
Kilani, Shadi: So dustin Hoffman This is basically telling us that the MIC chicken sandwiches a good candidate if the price goes down that what that's telling us.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, and so, for example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If so, let's see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: what's the what's the cost of them a chicken sandwich let's let's look here where's my chicken sandwich I wish you were an alphabetical order but they're not tell me when I hit it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There you go there are 229.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So that would be that would have to be a pretty incredible sale.
Kilani, Shadi: To officer.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Joe sorry two or four is it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Even makes my.
MS Analytics Class 2021: My point even stronger.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it would have to be like 50 cents, or something for it to go into the diet, yes, it is, it is, if you want to say good candidate that maybe that's not apropos and mcdonald's but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, if it was cheap enough, we would include it in the diet, if we were giving away my chicken sandwiches I will be first in line right, because even though that wouldn't be our whole diet, we could build a cheaper diet around a couple of fried chicken sandwiches right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: twice.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The price is right.
Fireman, Karen: Women, what would we do with the 2.4 from a chicken What did you say to do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh, so what you would do is let's say we subtract this off let's say this is 1.64.
Fireman, Karen: Right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we subtract that off of $2 and 40 cents, we get about 40 cents right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: right that would say if the price was less than 40 cents, then you probably would it would be better to include them in the diet and if the price is more than 40 cents, then no.
Fireman, Karen: it's this.
Fireman, Karen: I thought the price was the 2.4 i'm getting a little confused between.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It is, but when we talk about the meaning of the reduce costs were saying how much would the price change before it becomes attractive.
MS Analytics Class 2021: How much would the price of desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: agree, I saw tells you something about how the model would have to change in order before the kind of the solution, changes in.
Fireman, Karen: The city went down to 39 cents, it would be appealing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: appealing to some people, yes.
Fireman, Karen: Well i'm saying appealing in this model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, in this model.
Fireman, Karen: yeah.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's exactly right okay.
Kilani, Shadi: So ask a question, obviously I wasn't done, Sir, I just wanted to clarify one thing.
Kilani, Shadi: sure we did call for the program to print them a chicken sandwich it wasn't like it actually put that out to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You no, no, so I, in order to limit the number of things that I printed to reduce costs for, if you look at the code I just looked for everything that had the string can s personal friend.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Can sandwich chicken sandwich right so anything that has that sub string and I printed a reduced cost for if I if I didn't put this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: index that here, it would have printed all the reduced costs, so it didn't magically say that's the one we want to think about it that's that's the that's the pen ultimate food to include it's just that I asked for those two.
Kilani, Shadi: Thank you for the clarification, sir.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Thank you yep no problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you want, you can go back and look and see how the syntax works for printing those tables, but I was just trying to make a glamorous looking table.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so your breakout exercise is going to take you back to that table.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me Let me just remind you what it shows you, it shows you the intakes upper and lower bounds, and the dual values right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me i'll show you the slide for the breakout exercise it's not as much work as last week so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Probably will take us quite as long.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it looks like this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Oh let's let's let's not look at this let's look at this Okay, so it turns out that, and this is not something that i'm going to demonstrate for you i'm just going to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: share with you is that a linear programming model can only have an alternate optimal solution when you see a certain pattern in the dual values okay if there's a decision variable that its upper and lower bound, with a zero dollar value.
MS Analytics Class 2021: or a constraint that's tight against us upper and lower bound the dual value of zero.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Those.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If that's not true, there can't be an alternate optimal solution that has to have the unique optimal solution, but if you see that pattern, it should raise a flag that says haha there could potentially be an alternate optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because those zero dual value say you could change the limits and get a different solution that has the same price that would be an alternate optimal solution someone asked you to look for that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then compare the solution that I find in the course notes, which is found by sasa or 15.1 to what you find if you solve the same model like I just did in class with 14.3.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's possible, then you pardon.
Fireman, Karen: What is 15.1.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's the that's the subsequent release of SAS or.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's the one that I have loaded at home on my desktop on my laptop it's the one that the course notes are based on but because Texas a&m is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: unwilling to get the latest version of sasa war which you can talk to Meijer or Javier about it's usually an institutional decision, because if they if they get the newest version, they have to support it right that's why institutions don't always have the latest versions of software.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So they're just two different versions, one of the one of the versions, is a supercharged that'd be my version.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and yours is the tired old sad version.
Fireman, Karen: I guess what i'm asking you, is I don't understand the sentence you're telling us to look on the page, I see the page 227 and then what are we doing incense.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You don't have to do anything you just have to look at the solution there because I found it and printed it in on that page.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you compare the one I printed in the course notes to the one that you find using SAS studio with your version since we're using two different versions of SAS studio it's possible that we find different solutions.
Fireman, Karen: To the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: word for it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because, because the solvers job is to find an optimal solution there's no telling which one it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: will find if there are multiple.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if they if they tweak a parameter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: From one release to the next, it might find a different solution it's not like a regression model right a regression model will always find the same solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In an optimization model if there are alternate optimal solutions, it might find one or the other, and it could depend on which algorithm you choose or which release of the software you choose because they change the inner workings of the of the solvers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, not not in significant ways, but just tweaks that make them faster.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you're going to go into the course notes and look at the solution that's there and you're going to run the model, incest studio.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and see if it finds the same solution and because you might find a different solution if you use the primal or the dual simplex you're going to try and use different algorithms to see if they find the same or different solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, because if you look at the dual values either incest studio or in the course notes you'll find that this condition is satisfied.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That it could have an alternate optimal solution okay so basically what you're doing is you're opening up a page in the PDF and then running the program and incest, to do preparing the output.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, like I said it shouldn't take long because you don't have to do anything but running the model, so why don't we agreed to come back, about half past okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you don't like it, you can just take a 15 minute break.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that'd be a possible outcome all right.
So I will go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Solutions so one way, you can explore them as tried tried different algorithms to see what they find, but that does not really very systematic, although one thing that you might find useful is that, in that context.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If there are multiple optimal solutions, the interior point algorithm with the crossover equals off tends to like the ones that are compromise or a combination of several different ones.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But there are more efficient ways to explore the set of optimal solutions and i'll kind of indicate one in the following slide so that the next section we're going to look at it talks about.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Control flow in pocket model so going a step beyond building and solving a single optimization model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: pocket model as a language as an algebraic modeling language is has.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Control flow statements, so that can function like a programming language as well, and some of that simple programming can be useful, let me show you, knowing that you haven't seen the syntax but just to kind of give you the idea of the capabilities here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is prakash model code that will go through the program and look to see if that condition is true or not, whether whether it's satisfied because.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In this small model, you can look at the the solution and the table that I produced and say Oh, I see this, but in a larger model you.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Even looking at thousands of different constraints are variables doesn't make sense, but you want to kind of automate the process, so all this does is it says.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'll take a parameter that's either zero or one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if it zero, then the condition doesn't hold and if I see it, i'll flip it to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll loop over the foods that's what this for statement does it's like a loop.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And fried food I say is the dual value zero and is the decision variable zero if I see that then i'll set the flag to one that will indicate that there's possibly an alternate optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Then i'll loop over the constraints which are indexed by nutrients if the dual value of the constraint is zero and the constraints edits upper lower bound that i'll flip the flag to one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So now it's zero if the optimal solution is unique and it's one if there might be an alternate optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if it's one i'm going to do something to further explore and what i'm going to do is i'm going to pick a secondary objective and optimize it over the set of optimal solutions okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i've chosen to do here is to try and find the minimum cost diet, with the with the highest number of calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so the number of calories is at least 2000 and in one of the versions of these solutions, you can see that the dual value, corresponding to the calories constraint is zero so that would indicate this is one that might possibly have some wiggle room.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm going to do is i'm going to include a constraint that's going to look really weird we'll we'll kind of toss it aside for now, but we'll come back to you in the next lecture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It says total cost is that most total cost so well that seems like a tautology right because they should be the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, after solving the model total cost so well, is the minimum value, which is like $5 and 36 cents, I think, and total cost is an expression.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Which calculates the total cost of any diet, so any solution that satisfies the constraints and satisfies this one new constraint, because presumably the solved statement would come before this code anything that satisfies this and the other constraints is automatically an optimal solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, once we add this new constraint we're now exploring the set of optimal solutions and finding the optimal solution with the most calories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Likewise, if you if you saw some other constraints that had a zero dual value might explore like looking for one that had more or less cholesterol, but in any way, this is just like a secondary objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we can achieve our primary objective and all the solutions are equivalent in that measure we can try and then maximize or minimize some secondary objective.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay that's a more systematic way of exploring the optimal solutions, you could say well why don't we just enumerate them we let's look at all of them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Remember that all of them is probably infinite and there's not an easy way to generate all of them right there, there are some methods that we could use, but in terms of quick and dirty things, this is a good way to explore.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so like I said you don't know the syntax yet I just kind of just convey to you that pocket model is able to do that kind of checking by using control flow statements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so the next thing I want to look at the balance of the evening so i'm just going to highlighting that is the that's the magical constraint like I said what will address that will pick it back up the next time.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Talk about some basic control floss and i'm going to teach you enough to make it dangerous right where there's a lot more that you could potentially do.
MS Analytics Class 2021: so simple programming the kinds of control flow statements that i'm talking about are listed here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first one is kind of like a poor man or poor woman's programming statement the assignment statement that's no big deal, but then we get to some things that are more interesting that, let us kind of loop over blocks of code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you're a SAS data step programmer a lot of these same control flow statements work in the SAS data step.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But I have a feeling that a lot of you are not data set programmers if that's the case, these are just common structures that you'll see in basically any programming language and see fortran whatever maybe not basic but.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what some of these that are distinctive to prakash model are for statement which I showed you a little teaser for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The for statement loops over the elements of an index set it could be an index set of numbers index set of strings.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It allows you to loop over that and do something like a programming statement assignment statement block of code for every member of the index set okay that's that's very convenient.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's it's it's richer than the fast data step programming, because we have Richard index sets in pocket model, the other one thats related to that is a Co for which is kind of a parallel or concurrent version of the four statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's kind of a clickable depending on what you're looping over so if you're doing something that's inherently sequential.
MS Analytics Class 2021: where you have to finish one loop before you start the next, then you can't really do it in parallel.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But if you're doing something for like a bunch of different alternatives that don't really interact with each other, and it can be done in parallel.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the Co for can do that more efficiently by farming it out to different processors, so I would say when you're modeling.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You just use for for everything, and then, when it works and you want to try and make it more efficient, you want to think about whether you can get away with a Co for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, this is this kind of depends on on on the situation, but a lot of these other things are pretty self explanatory If, then, if then else common programming statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do blocks are ways to to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Say loop over a block of code, instead of just a single statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Do until do While these are loops so a lot of it is just common sense, how it works and i'm only going to illustrate a few of these like I said just enough to make you dangerous.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you are really interested you could explore more in the the what's called the math programming user's guide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: which includes the syntax of pocket model information technical information about all the solvers and more fun educational material, you can Google that if you want SAS or math programming user's guide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so there's a little bit of a danger here, and this is the people who run who.
MS Analytics Class 2021: developed the pocket model compiler they see this as a slippery slope, and what they see as a slippery slope is the nesting of declaration statements, let me give you an example of something that horrifies them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We say if today is Monday that i'm declaring this to be a number it's a parameter if it's another day i'll declare to be a string parameter.
MS Analytics Class 2021: kiss seems reasonable little weird but what's the problem with that well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of the things that the compiler does is it it checks types, to see if there are syntax errors and if it doesn't know if your parameter is a number or string it has a really hard time checking syntax.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the way that they kind of get around this the compiler folks is they say you just can't nest declaration statements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: nesting would mean inside a loop inside of If, then, or if then else statement you can't declare things in a loop right you can't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the in the the statements for an if then statement that the action items there you can't declare things.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You have to pull them out of the loop or out of the offended l statement and there are workarounds that we can use that that kind of make this not quite as severe as it may seem, but just keep in mind that you can't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: nest declaration statements.
Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me, let me show you a scenario that will illustrate some of the control flow.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we had a we had a transportation model or problem I guess it was because it was so small.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That had two origins and three destinations like Chicago and Detroit were sending barrels of beer to other cities in the northeast right and we developed a model at the beginning of one of our.
MS Analytics Class 2021: lectures to solve that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if you did some of the optional exercises you'll see they're slightly larger transportation models there that you can you can solve.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Larger in the sense that they have more origins and more destinations, so the data sets that you would read in our larger so i'm going to look at a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: A much larger large scale, but much larger than two by three or the ones in the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the the practices transportation model, the the the model elements would be the same it's just solves the bigger problem by reading and more data, but the structure of the model is the same.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the the setting is various locations in North America.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the data that we have is we have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Factories factories correspond to our origins and we have customers that correspond to our destinations and, if you want, you can still think about shipping barrels of beer and that's what I like to think about shipping.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The the rub for this problem is that we don't have cost data, so we don't have transportation costs we don't have unit shipping costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let's say we want to kind of explore what the solutions might look like to see if this is a business opportunity worth pursuing.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we can't get the detailed cost information we want something that we can use the kind of approximates the unit shipping costs, and one thing that we could use as a surrogate for unit shipping cost is distance.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Because it's going to cost more to ship if things are farther apart roughly So if you were if you were to look at a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: scatter plot of unit shipping cost versus distance it wouldn't be a straight line, but it wouldn't be too far off some kind of a straight line so we could use that as an approximation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, maybe we don't know the distances well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We can calculate them incest, so if we know the locations of all of our factories and customers SAS has a function called God just.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The calculates the geometric distance the as the crow flies distance between two points described by latitudes and longitudes okay now we've seen that we can use SAS functions in pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: have we seen that well we've seen that we could use constant pi constant big right so there's This seems like it's reasonable that we could use other SAS functions as well, and we can.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we wanted to calculate the distances and use them as a surrogate for cost, we would need to somehow loop over all the factories and the customers in order to do this calculation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now if you're curious as to what the M stands for anyone want to make a wild guess what the M stands for.
Travis Smith: miles.
MS Analytics Class 2021: miles right because the rest of the world is more reasonable and uses kilometers that's the default right So if you want to use miles, you have to add this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: addison okay so let's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: First, give you a little bit of a bonus Jonas here.
Jim Clark: And, just a quick question, so the m is just, meaning that it's is miles, and if you don't evolve is it's a leader.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah it's kilometers and and of course we will get the same solution anyway right because it's just scaling.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just in the same way that if you mentioned your objective in dollars and you converted to shackles you would get the same answer, because everything would relatively be the same, that makes sense.
Jim Clark: Yes, you're thinking.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so so but, but if this makes it a little more intuitive because we were kind of programmed to think in terms of miles.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are a couple of ways that we can incorporate SAS functions and in SAS procedures in pocket model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the first one, I kind of illustrated a couple of times that we can use SAS function in expressions, that would mean that you can, if you are working with a non linear model, you can have these SAS statistical functions or other weird SAS functions in there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some sass functions are kind of complicated in the sense that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The arguments are a list, instead of a couple of values, an example of a SAS function like that is the median function.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The arguments have a median function is a list of numbers, and then it returns, the meeting of those numbers there's a special proc model syntax that allows you to call those SAS functions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm not going to worry about that something that will see a little bit later on, and it will kind of factor into your.
MS Analytics Class 2021: into your.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Project, not your final exam is that we can actually call SAS procedures from inside pocket model or just blocks of SAS code, more generally, and one of the ways that that's useful is in the middle of a pocket model program you can.
MS Analytics Class 2021: append to a data set you can create graphs it's a lot of utility there because there's a lot of things you can do with SAS procedures, but for now we're just going to kind of take advantage of the first of those alternatives.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here is using the force statement, the statement in action in a pocket model program so we're just going to loop and calculate the distances.
MS Analytics Class 2021: before this happens, we want to make sure that we've got the data that's required, so we need a place to store the answers so here's my parameter array called disk for distance.
MS Analytics Class 2021: indexed by origins and destinations right because we're transporting from origins to destinations those the distances, that we need.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'll also assume that I had been able to get longitudes and latitudes of knowing them for both.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The origins and the destinations or both the factories and the customers so i'll assume that cities.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is a an index set that combines the customers and the factories right because they they both have this characteristic of latitude and longitude so, then the forest statement would look like this well or one way of doing it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm looping over the origins, I say for iron origins and then the the compiler is going to do whatever the next statement is free to origin.
MS Analytics Class 2021: My next statement is for Jane destinations so it's like a double loop right so for each origin for each destination it calculates this distance using the geo dispersed SAS function.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I have two for loops and I have an assignment statement so that that's Australian these two different types of programming statements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There is, however, a way to do this, a little bit more efficiently.
MS Analytics Class 2021: gun kind of peeking out here, but one of the reasons that this is this could be made more efficient is that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: For a fixed origin.
MS Analytics Class 2021: As we move over the destinations i'm doing table look ups for lat I and long I over and over again, and always getting the same values right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I could make this a little bit more efficient if I just store those values, and in this case in in pocket model would store them as parameters so i'm going to include two parameters called laddie and lonnie which are the latitude and longitude of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Origin I and so i'll change this to loop over the origins store those values in as parameters, so instead of looking at an a table i'm just looking at a particular location and data here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then loop over the destinations and instead of the latitude and longitudes being looked up i'll just use laddie and long so it's it's it's not much, much faster but i'm using it all straight in addition to the for loops or four statements and an assignment statement I do block.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So do block is kind of a SAS way of doing a block of code it starts with the do and ends with an end which I can start talking maybe you could see.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So in between the doing the end there's one two assignments statements and a force statement, so those three statements, make up a do block and that block is done for each origin can just a way of grouping programming statements into a block of programming statements.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: about all the all the control flow that i'm going to teach you to do, apart from maybe a little bit of if then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's actually see what this looks like kind of as part of a pocket model program i'll do a DEMO for this, let me ask for a little input from you here, though.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is a multiple answer questions so it's kind of like three true false questions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, which of these are true, some of them will be reviewing some of them will reinforce something that we've just learned.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So do we have to declare.
MS Analytics Class 2021: parameter arrays decision variables and implicit variables before they're used.
Fireman, Karen: Yes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Yes, we do that's kind of like a general guiding principle of a pocket model, but about local Deli parameters and you may say, what are those those are things like indexes of summation or now as we've seen kind of looping indices.
Swanson J, Charles: And no.
MS Analytics Class 2021: No, we don't have to declare those, and the reason that we don't is because the compiler can always tell what the types are by looking at the sets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you don't have to tell the compiler whether it's a string or a number, what about this last one this mysterious statement here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: True right so that's the one that we just learned that that's the new information.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let me, let me go in and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And and show you that code in action.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is a again, as I said, a larger.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Transportation model, but not large in the sense of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like what would be considered a large scale problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to go ahead and open this up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is called USA so it's at the bottom here i'm sorry not just transportation, but it's a.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm sorry i'm in the wrong the wrong lesson.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Forgive me here so i'm in less than three.
MS Analytics Class 2021: demos.
MS Analytics Class 2021: USA transportation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Transportation desk there we go.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's let's look at the data sets first, is that this is kind of a lot of gobbledygook here but let's let's let's see the data sets, so let me go into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Up library.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And I have two data sets of customers and factories show you the smaller one first, which is factories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it has the location of the factory city commerce state and the supply and then a red herring right, it has a variable which we're not going to use, but we might use at some point later in the future so location and supply.
MS Analytics Class 2021: customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's a slightly larger SAS data set hundred and 48 customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: location again city commerce stayed in demand right because the factories have a supply customers have a demand transportation problem says how to do the shipping to satisfy the demand at a minimum cost right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But as I said, we don't have any cost any detailed cost data so there's no cost or unit cost data set that's all the data that we have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The wait a minute.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Where are the locations where is the longitude latitude it's gone.
MS Analytics Class 2021: well.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It turns out that we can steal those things from SAS SAS has a long list along data set that has the locations longitudes and latitudes of cities in the US and in decimal degrees, which is just what we need.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's organized in a weird way it's not city comma state because it's a SAS they have to do it their own way it's city and state number.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, even though that states had numbers well SAS gave them numbers like so like SAS date right, you know numerical SAS date so in order to calculate the distances, we are going to have to go out and steal those values from some SAS data sets so that the the part of the program that looks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like gobbledygook.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is SAS data steps, and this is not a class about SAS data steps i'm just going to try and explain to you what they're doing and not worry too much about how the syntax works.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So what i'm doing here is i'm going into customers and factories combining those data sets and from the city commerce state extracting the name of the city.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And calculating and the the two digit number of the state, I mean two digit abbreviation and then using a SAS function called i'm calculating the state number right and if I run this this will produce.
MS Analytics Class 2021: locations, I can show you this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me try and do this see want to go into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Here we go okay I hopefully i'm an interactive mode, which is means I can submit just some code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm gonna try and submit just as block of code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then I can look at that data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: should be in work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's not Okay, so I don't know why interactive mode is not working.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I don't think Texas animal allows interactive mode it's it's against some kind of state regulation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll come back and look at this i'll just run the whole code.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you can ignore the man behind the curtain will just open up the data sets and look real quick.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when I said the problem wasn't a large problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I indicated to you earlier, that a large linear programming model might have millions of variables our model doesn't have close to that number of variables our model would have how many variables let's think about it, it would have.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Think 13 factories times 148 customers so it's still.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Small potatoes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I do not know why this is doing this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's madness I tell you it's madness okay let's let's let's look at the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: data sets here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I do not understand this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe in web work see this okay so here let's let's look at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The data sets here's locations.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see that it has now the city.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The State number right so that's the information that we've we've combined here and we're going to try and get the longitudes and latitudes so how that works is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to go out and steal it from the SAS data set that exists in SAS foundation called maps.us city so maps.us city has a list of all the cities by city and state number and then lots of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Interesting stuff about them, including their longitudes and latitudes things like population data, for example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so This just goes out and.
MS Analytics Class 2021: looks for those values in the larger data set and then combines that data set to form location data.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So now location data has by location longitudes and latitudes that's what we need to do our calculations right, so if you're interested in SAS data set programming, you can try and look at that, but for my money here i'm going to use this as input, the longitudes and latitudes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's go back into the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: two groups off the page here has petition just snapping the modeling part, this is the fun part.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to have a set of origins, instead of destinations, I had those in the transportation model now i'm going to have a set of cities which is going to read the information in about the longitudes and latitudes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I have my distance parameter array and I have my little friends loudly and logging.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll read the data from the.
Fireman, Karen: factories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: With the data from the customers read the location data about the cities where I have the latitudes and longitudes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: that's the data set I just showed, you and I have my little loop.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So there's the for statement and the do loop, and you can see that the the compile that the editor is pretty good about recognizing keywords, but there are some situations where there are things that should be in bright blue that aren't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's kind of mysterious to me what what kind of syntax it has trouble with, but the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The group that maintains the SAS studio editor is not the same as the group that does proc up models so they have to like say make requests for weird stuff and it might or might not get done at any rate, so I calculate the distances.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's my model and this isn't a huge model in the sense that there's not a lot of elements but they're indexed by arrays and by sets that are large now so that becomes larger in the sense that it has more.
MS Analytics Class 2021: decisions to be made, so I have numb ship, as my decision variables flow out and flow in remember we formulated that two by three transportation problem in class.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Supply constraints demand constraints, the only thing that's different is my objective, instead of being total cost is now total distance using distance as a surrogate for costs.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so now i'm going to throw caution to the wind and try and run this again.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Not knowing why it was weird.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's go out of interactive mode and just run it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sorry, I had something highlighted now I don't.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so it actually sells fairly quickly, it is not a big model 2000 decision variables.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so let's look and see what we got here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So instead of printing all of the values of numb ship, for which there would be 2000 values I have like I I indicated in the last lecture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: narrowed it down to the ones that have a positive value of trying to decrease the amount of information overload here, so you can see that they're still on the other hand, is a lot of shipping going on, because we have you know hundred and 50 customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I don't know how much useful nuggets you can glean from all these numbers that are flooding Byron screen it's just too much information to take in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: at once, about the solution So what are the things that we could do with this and it's in one of your suggested practices is calculate some summary statistics of the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And kind of given a couple of suggestions here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But there's actually something neat that we can do, since we're using SAS and we have all the capabilities of doing things in SAS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If you look at the code at the end I created a SAS data set that's basically the table, I just showed you its origin destination and amount.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, but it's only the positive ones so it's exactly what I showed you in the print statement of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I can read that data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and show you the solution.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And let me open another SAS program so let me go back up into files and folders Chapter three.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to open up instead of transportation disk transportation that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This also has a lot of regally data sets data steps let's run it and see what happens and then we'll go back and kind of game plan What would it did.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's going to read in the data from that data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it went well it's super impose the solution on the map on a map of the US.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So it's now easier to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Take in some of the information from that solution in the sense that the colored circles are the factories.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The black circles which look like diamonds, because the fact that problems are the customers.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The bigger circles have more supply than the smaller circles, the the the the lines correspond to shipments and the thicker lines correspond to bigger shipments or partial to the number of units shipped.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this allows us to take in a lot of information, all at once and it's not terribly hard to produce using SAS so SAS is able to draw the map.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then annotate it using the labels generated from the transportation problem solution, and so, if you look at this solution is anything catch your eye.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That anything weird or wonders about it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What do you notice.
Jim Clark: it's a lot of go faster than their own country, not much happens.
Coleman, Clay: there's there's also lines connecting Washington to Alaska that's below and Hawaii that's not exactly where it is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: yeah well you know SAS is a, this is a big company obsessed wants to move Alaska down here south of California, they can do it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's kind of like Wikipedia right if enough people want to change reality we just becomes truth, instead of truth, so yeah so so Alaska and Hawaii really aren't down there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And if Alaska was in the right place those lines wouldn't be so long wouldn't seem quite so out of place.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some of the things that I might point out that that are.
Swanson J, Charles: Like it looks like some of the factories are sent to different factories or sending some.
Swanson J, Charles: product to the same place.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That could be an issue it kind of depends on what we're shipping.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I would say, if you were shipping something like televisions that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Probably doesn't make a difference, but if we're shipping.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe cars or designer dresses or something where the color could be slightly different and if they're sitting in the parking lot or on the Rack next to each other and they're supposed to be the same item and they're slightly different.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That might put the customer off so that could be something that we want you kind of control for you might want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If that is an issue, then we want to add some additional restrictions or constraints to our model to make sure that that doesn't happen and that might not be something that you could detect as easily looking at the list as.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can from looking at the picture, but once you identify in the picture, then you could use the commands within pocket model to say okay tell me which those cities are and tell me which factory supply them and things like that just capabilities of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: me print and put.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, so there's there's something to be said there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And again, if you look at the code it's basically SAS data steps and then there's a graph.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we go down to the end here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: To la junk there here's a prop G map that draws the graph and annotates it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Using a SAS data set and again like I said it's not a class on on SAS data step programming, I just wanted to show you that you could do these kinds of things in SAS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: One of the things that you may be curious about is why we do the sorting in the in this process, what what could possibly need to be sorted to draw that picture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In SAS when you want to merge data sets they have to be sorted first so that can kind of like go through them efficiently and pull the information out that you need that's that's what the sorting is doing here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That that's all I really wanted to do with that example is to demonstrate some of the control flow and to show you that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Working in pocket model because pocket model is a part of SAS there's there's a lot of functionality of SAS that we can call.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In our program so we can combine this into one program actually our program could have gone out to SAS foundation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: gather the data in solve the model and then produce the graph all in one program, although that program consists of different SAAs procedures and they exchange information by creating and reading SAS data sets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so let me go back.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I just want to show you a little bit more kind of control flow related things and then we'll stop and pick it up in the next lecture.
MS Analytics Class 2021: In the next lecture we're in kind of use the control flow and operators of pocket model to do model updates, but first I want to just kind of show you what some of those are and then later on we'll come back and learn how we can make use of them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Alright, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I show you the control flow the kind of loops and if, then, and so forth.
MS Analytics Class 2021: pocket model also has a lot of built in operators, so what is an operator operator is something like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Times divided by plus minus Those are all operators that we learn early in our lives.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But it also has set operators and i've illustrated some here by picture so some common set operators, the Union difference intersection or symmetric difference of two sets.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And in proc up model typically when we talk about sets we're talking about index sets a simple example of one of these set operations could be.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say we have a set of origins and a set of destinations and we want to find a set of cities, which is all the common members that could be factories or customers that could be achieved by Union right, so the Union takes two sets and returns of set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So those are commonly used in pocket model, you could kind of hard code all these things, I mean in your program you could write some code that would do these things, but they're defined as operators because they're very useful in optimization modeling.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Some of these can be used as aggregation operators so aggregation operators, instead of taking just two arguments take a sequence of arguments like here's the Union of two sets here's the Union of some number of sets that in this case is three but could be arbitrarily large.
MS Analytics Class 2021: here's the intersection of two sets here's the intersection as an aggregation operator and a collection of sets an array of sets right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: There are other operators that can be used as aggregation operators, one that we've already seen, which is the sum.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, the some adds an arbitrary number of terms up there's a product operator that multiplies things together, there are some logical operators like and and or so you can have the end of a collection of state of conditions or the order of a collection of conditions.
MS Analytics Class 2021: there's also Max and Min and that might seem like magic because we've already talked about how kind of complicated maximizing and minimizing is.
MS Analytics Class 2021: These are element wise maximum then it's like you have a list of numbers what's the biggest what's the smallest that's a much simpler way of thinking about maximum.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so those are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All can be used as aggregation operators and in various contexts, those are useful in optimization modeling some of them would be useful in it more useful in a non linear programming setting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Sometimes they're also useful for kind of pre processing or post processing, even in a linear programming setting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, let me give you an example here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This is kind of a hypothetical situation this probably happens all the time in Texas, but aliens land and they steal all the desks all right, no desk they're all gone through what happens.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, being interrupted people that we are we all rush out to the department stores by desks right because our desks are gone, so this is a mad rush worldwide for deaths.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So as a furniture making company, how do we respond to this, this is this is kind of like a different situation that's happening in our country, at this time not involving desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, we decided we say all of our production should be converted to making desks right because that's that's what the world needs so we say Okay, this is maybe a simpler question to answer what's the most number of desks, that we can make.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Irrespective of what's profitable what's not profitable let's look at our resources and see what's the most number of deaths, we could make.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well that's a pretty easy calculation, so we go back to our kind of schematic for desks that our factory, we say Okay, it takes so much Labor so much metal and so much wood to make a desk.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's look at our resource availabilities Okay, so we have 225 hours of Labor takes two hours of Labor to make a desk so how many desk could we make just considering the Labor requirements.
Purkiss, David: 12 and a half.
MS Analytics Class 2021: hundred and 12 and a half right unless one of the other resources runs out first So what about metal.
MS Analytics Class 2021: hundred and 17 pounds and metal each desk requires one pounds, so we could make 117 before we run out of metal so obviously we're went out of Labor first well, maybe, would you have 420 cubic feet of wooden each requires three cubic feet.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And for those of you scoring a home hundred and 40 right, so it turns out that Labor is the most restrictive of our resources and we could make at most 112 and a half desks.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right now, this is a simple calculation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say how would we do this in general.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's say we had instead of just three resources we have 300 resources, what is it what is the calculation that we're doing so we're dividing things, but when we compare these, what are we looking for.
Swanson J, Charles: A minimum.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You were looking for the minimum, so this is, this is the, this is the component wise or element wise minimum, this is exactly what the men.
MS Analytics Class 2021: operator is designed for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, the men aggregation operator.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let me i'm going to do this as a DEMO.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me, let me go through, let me go into.
MS Analytics Class 2021: An elder DEMO this lesson three practice to that SAS and i'm going to try and do that calculation now, not just for desks, but for all the products Okay, so let me open this up lesson three practice to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So here we go we're in the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Practices lesson three practice to SAS.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is reading the information and for the furniture making problem.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And here, where it says compute upper bounds, is where the action is going to take place.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm looping over the products i'm going to do the calculation for each product, including desks hopefully i'll get the same answer for desks that I got before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: i'm going to store that information in the suffix parameter re numb prod P or P, is a specific product.up so there's a place to put it that's natural.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I just need to figure out how to do the calculation.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the easiest way to think about this is that the syntax for the men is the same as the syntax for the song so let's pretend we're adding them up, instead of multiple instead of looking for the smallest, so I want to thinking about back to this slide.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I compared Labor metal and wood, so what i'm doing is i'm looking at the resources, so I put our and resources sorry re.
MS Analytics Class 2021: sources and then, what was the expression that I looked at.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I looked at the amount that was available right, which would be in this case availability.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's the availability of this particular resource, what did I divide by.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I divided by how much of that resource goes into the particular product and that's required.
MS Analytics Class 2021: acquired and we always have to make sure that we get the right order so requires products and resources, so it would be P comma are.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So you can see here that this would add up all these terms if the men works exactly the same, we just take some out and put him in.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so that should look at the for the minimum of this expression.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Now if i'm worried about the order of operations, I can put it in parentheses, but since I know that multiplication and division comes before.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The sun it's reasonable to expect that it comes before the men, I can try this and see if it comes up with something reasonable for us let's try it.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so, in fact, we are getting answers and we're getting a value for desks that agrees with what we did on our simple simple calculation, so that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The most desolate could make is hundred and 12 and a half and different values for the other products, thank goodness, the Aliens haven't taken our chairs are bookcases are would be in real trouble.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But that little code snippet using a four statement.
MS Analytics Class 2021: to calculate those values using them in aggregation operator now if I added those bounds into the linear programming model.
MS Analytics Class 2021: It wouldn't solve any faster they're not really useful to have, in that case.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But we'll see later that there is a another model that will look at that or require us to have those bounds as part of the formulation, so there is some utility and actually calculating those things, apart from aliens landing and stealing all the deaths okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is just an example, using the men.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You can use like I said prod the all these other operators that can be useful in different contexts.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this again just in in living color here just kind of indicates our store calls out where the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Local dummy parameters are new you know, in the editor it doesn't light up like a Christmas tree for local me parameters, but it's sometimes useful to see the roles that they play that's why I try and highlight them and in color sometimes.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay close your eyes quickly there we go i've got two more operators, I want to show you and then.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we'll look at one last DEMO involving mcdonald's.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So the other operators that are kind of unusual so some of these set operators that you may have seen before, so we had.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Union intersection so forth.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Cross forms across product of sense cardinality cardinality of a set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What is another one that's related to set within asks if one set is contained in another, so there are a lot of useful set operations in not in says, an element is in the set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The two that I want to show you pictures for the or kind of weird and they're kind of optimizations specific here, the first one is called a slice operator.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And the slice operator takes a set, which is a multi dimensional set typically and i'm indicating this set in a little network that i've drawn here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: it's a set of arrows or a set of ordered pairs so this arrow that points from one to three, you can think of as the order pair 123 or you can think of it as kind of like a origin destination pair or shipping route whatever you have okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So this is the arrows are the elements of the set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Their pairs of numbers and the slices saying find me all of the arcs that meet this pattern that have anything in the first component and a foreign the second.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And you can see the the the result of the slice circles in red.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if you wanted to describe those red ones, two, three and six in in words, how would you how would you describe them.
Stephanie Pollock: multiples of sex.
For.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, they were the kind of the factors of six but that's kind of coincidental they're all the ones that point to for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That makes sense right because a four and the second position means that there there's a two and a from to the ones that point two, four, or if this was some kind of a transportation network, who would be things that shipped to for.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so you can see, in a logistics model where the slice might come into play and in, in particular, if you want to extend that out a little bit.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Maybe in a logistics model we have like a an origin destination and a mode of transportation, so he might have triples instead of pairs and so you can see the utility of the slice they're not only can I say who can ship before, but maybe.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What mode of transportation, can you get to for us okay so various useful ways that we can use this operator in in in optimization models here's another fun one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: This one's called set of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And so it says, in this case again i'm using the same set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So, for all the arcs and an Arc is of the form, I nj look at the set of jays.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so how would you looking at the picture, how would you describe this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Again in in just kind of informally.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well it's not everything that points to four that's for sure.
MS Analytics Class 2021: what's true about the ones that aren't aren't in read.
MS Analytics Class 2021: What seems unique about two and five.
Coleman, Clay: nothing's pointing to them.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so this set is the.
MS Analytics Class 2021: set of all the things that are pointed to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: write all of the jays for all the IGF all of the arrows all the things they point to.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so, so the two and five don't have anything to point to them so that's why they're not included in the set, and you can have any anything in the place of Jay so we could have the set of eyes for all the arcs and that would be all the things that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: point to something.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Right, so that this is another way to construct typically a higher dimension of a lower dimensional set from a higher dimensional set and has has a place in optimization modeling.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me, let me show you an example of that and then we'll close.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'm going to go back to the McDonalds example.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And i'm trying to clear down to fucking.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Get back to where we just had that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I made the observation that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: When we ran this.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Read data statement to populate food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: That it would create a lot of warnings, let me show you what those warnings look like.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's go the first one.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when we try and read the data set there's a lot of entrees, and so it says there are duplicate keys.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So we already read that observation and then we've got another another another so that doesn't add any any additional ones, so it gives us a warning because that's something that that just seems weird to the compiler.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And it's going to add your meeting.
MS Analytics Class 2021: You think well, maybe there's a different way that we can do this, maybe there's another way to get those same values out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is there a way that we can populate the set of food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: in a different way than reading it from the SAS data set and i'll indicate that there is, and it makes use of one of the set operators that we just talked about.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so, so what I would be doing in this case is instead of reading this from the SAS data set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: I might want to go up here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: and try and populated maybe i'll just move its declaration statement down to below.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's take this out.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And then i'll just declare it down here.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So i'll say set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: crisis.
MS Analytics Class 2021: must be must be a medical name for my typing impairment.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So how could we use it one of those set operators to initialize or populate the set of food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Well, first thing The thing is, I think I was let's let's consider the slice.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So when, in order to do something useful with a slice we kind of need a multi dimensional set.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And we don't really have a lot of multiple multi dimensional sets floating around, but the other one which we learned.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We might actually have a chance to make that work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Is where we can use set of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So let's let's see how could we do that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: let's try set of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Jane foods.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So I said, you could do anything with the J right.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So if we want the set of types of all the foods.
MS Analytics Class 2021: We could say the set of.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Just type.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Type J.
MS Analytics Class 2021: like that.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So make sense, so we take our all the elements of the set generate an element in the new set food types.
MS Analytics Class 2021: And that will generate that same set, but without producing a lot of warnings let's let's try it see if I haven't screw anything up.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Knowing the whole thing seems to work.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so demonstrating at least the utility of or some some utility of setup.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Let me describe to you in this context of the McDonalds problem, how we might actually use.
MS Analytics Class 2021: The slice let's see we're solving this problem for lots of different locations and for mcdonald's like for all their franchises are all all all the franchise on by some some some big group that runs mcdonald's restaurants and they all might have different menus.
MS Analytics Class 2021: If we have a data set that has all the nutritional information for all the products at all the places, and we want to say.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Look at all the McDonalds that have the mcrib and solve the diet problem for those mcdonald's, then the slice could pull up all the franchises that sell the mcrib sandwich.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so there's if I kind of stretch this example, a little bit I can think of a way to to illustrate the slice.
MS Analytics Class 2021: But in this case the setup is a lot more graceful way to define this new set in terms of the other set without reading the data set and getting a lot of warnings.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Okay, so we'll stop there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Like I said, I just wanted to give you enough to be dangerous and hopefully enough to do the homework.
MS Analytics Class 2021: So so i've had a number of occasions where people.
MS Analytics Class 2021: spin their wheels and then kind of get.
MS Analytics Class 2021: frustrated, I mean encourage you, because i'm available a lot in email that if you are running into roadblocks just you know send me your code send me the log and i'll be happy to give you some feedback okay.
MS Analytics Class 2021: All right, we'll stop there.
MS Analytics Class 2021: we'll pick it up in the next next lecture.
Swanson J, Charles: Thank you.
Amanda Pham: Thank you, Dr Herman.
MS Analytics Class 2021: Good luck on the final.
Amanda Pham: you're so funny.
Jordan Gross: thing.